---
title: homework 0 - calibration & assignment turn in
description: Deploy and test your first web app
due: "2024-09-05T14:00:00"
release: "2024-08-27T08:00:00"
---

import { formatTime } from "../../../utils.ts";
import { Content as Deadlines } from "../../../components/Deadlines.md";

{/* # This is the tentative assignment description - it will be updated for fall 2024 soon (and this text will go away) */}

## {frontmatter.description}

**Quickstart**: Click "use this template" on the [skeleton
code](https://github.com/swad-cs-uic/homework0/) to create a new **private**
repository in your account. [See below](#alternate-quickstart) for more details.  
**Due**: {formatTime(frontmatter.due)}

By the end of this assignment you will have your own web app deployed on the web
for all to see. The coding part is dead simple - you just have to change the
text in a few files. The more important part is getting your tools set up for
_Continuous Integration_ and _Continuous Deployment_.

### Local development

After accepting the assignment using the link above, you will be given access to
a repository containing the skeleton code. You can clone your repository from
`git@github.com:ckanich-classrooms/homework0-YOUR_GITHUB_USERNAME.git` and open
that directory in your favorite IDE. I would recommend VS Code, as I will be
using that for my demonstrations.

#### Installing Node.js

We will be using Node.js to build and run JavaScript applications. The easiest
way to get started is to go to the [Node.js download
page](https://nodejs.org/en/download) and download the LTS version of Node.js
for your laptop. This will allow you to use the `node` command to run JavaScript
programs from the command line, and use the node package manager `npm` to
download dependencies for your project, install additional packages, run package
scripts, and more.

#### Installing Docker

We will be using Docker to containerized environment for testing the web application.
Install Docker from [Docker's official website](https://docker.com).

#### Running the template

Open your new project in your IDE, and in the console run `npm install` to
download the code for all of the dependencies needed to fully run the project.
You can then run the code in development mode by invoking the `dev` script by
running the command `npm run dev`. This will run your app in a special mode
where any updates to your source code are immediately pushed to the browser via
a special plugin that isn't included in your code when you actually build it
for production.

#### Codespaces option

I've also enabled to the GitHub Codespaces feature. Codespaces creates a linux
container in the cloud that allows you to run a fully featured Visual Studio
Code, with access to all extensions and even extra linux containers for things
like databases, without having to install anything on your local machine.

I haven't tested it yet as a way to start working on _this assignment
specifically_, but it should allow you to do every assignment for this class
directly from your browser.

### Getting the most out of your IDE

Modern programming makes extensive use of strong typing - the ability to declare
(or infer) at build time what type any given symbol refers to. Importantly, this
allows your IDE to understand your code as you type, and give you suggestions
for which methods to call, what value an argument should take, or inform you
when you've used something incorrectly.

To get full credit on this assignment, you must pass a **formatting** checker, a
a **type** checker, and a **lint** checker.

#### Format checking

Formatting your code according to a standard makes it easy to look at code
diffs, both by making the code easy to read, and by minimizing the chances that
changes that don't impact the functionality of your code (like whitespace and
newlines) show up in the diffs at all. **Your brain capacity** is the limiting
factor in good programming, and you should be using tools that minimize your
mental effort whenever possible.

In this project, we use [Prettier](https://prettier.io/) with the default
settings. In VSCode, you can install the extension and turn on
`editor.formatOnSave` and set Prettier as the default formatter, and your code
will be formatted correctly automatically. The points you get for proper
formatting should be the three easiest points you've ever gotten.

#### Type checking

TypeScript introduces strong typing to JavaScript through a superset of the
language. The TypeScript compiler can confirm every use of a symbol against the
types for those objects/functions/operators/etc, and ensure that they are being
used correctly. Visual Studio Code performs type checking by default on
TypeScript files, so you should see any type errors by default as red squiggles
and in the "Problems" panel.

#### Lint checking

Linting checks for issues that will not necessarily cause your code to crash or
even run incorrectly, but nonetheless are very usually errors. Take for instance
the [no-dupe-else-if](https://eslint.org/docs/latest/rules/no-dupe-else-if)
rule, which states that you can't use the same conditional more than once in the
same set of else-if statements. So while this code is correct JavaScript that
can execute:

```js
if (a) {
  foo();
} else if (b) {
  bar();
} else if (b) {
  baz();
}
```

The call to `baz()` will never happen, and it's very likely there's some
programmer error happening here. Linters are designed with [dozens of
rules](https://eslint.org/docs/latest/rules/) that help find issues like these
for you.

### How to "fix" the code

You only need to change two files in the repository: you need to edit
`student.json` in the root of the repository to include your email address, and
you need to change `src/main.ts` to include your own email address instead of
`ckanich@uic.edu`. You'll need to edit `student.json` again later, but that's
all for now.

### How to look at your website

If you want to experiment with your website, you can run `npm run dev` and your
email address should show up as soon as you save `main.ts`. As long as my email
address doesn't show up in the text of the site, and yours does as part of the
string "website of youremail@uic.edu", you can make it look as pretty or ugly or
ridiculous as you want. Go nuts!

### Local testing

Once you have edited those files, you can run the local tests by running `npm
run test` script. This script will look through your repository for specially
named files (in our case, files that end in `.test.ts`, of which there is only
one), and run them in the testing environment. The tests in this assignment are
all in `src/main.test.ts` and are worth taking a look at to understand.

Before getting to the Continuous Deployment section, you should be able to get
the two "on the dev server" tests running for 10 points.

For Docker testing, you can run the tests by running `docker compose up --build`.
This will builds the docker image for testing environment, installs needed
dependencies to run, then looks through your repository for test files, and run
them in the testing environment. To clean up the docker container, you can run
`docker compose down --volumes --rmi all`.

### Remote testing

**AKA Continuous Integration**

When you're the only person working on a repository, it makes sense to run the
tests locally. But once you start working in larger teams on important software,
it's important that there's one source of truth for whether the tests are
passing or not. To simulate that, this repository is set up to use GitHub
actions to do continuous integration testing. The file
`.github/workflows/ci.yaml` describes the list of tests that are run; it simply
installs all of the dependencies, then runs the three format, lint, and type
check scripts, and fails if any of them fail. You can see the output of the CI
runs in the Actions tab for your repository.

### Continuous Deployment

So far, we've built and run our code locally, and on GitHub's servers. Now for
the fun part - deploying our web app. You must deploy your web app to the
Internet for full credit on this assignment. There are many free places to do
so, including [Cloudflare Pages](https://pages.cloudflare.com/),
[Netlify](https://netlify.com), and [Vercel](https://vercel.com). I recommend
using one of those three as they are the easiest to set up and have features we
will use later on in class, but you can use Amazon, GitHub pages, or any other
service as long as the web app can be deployed successfully and stays online (we
may re-run the autograder at any time). The one thing you may need to configure
is the build command: we are using the [vite](https://vitejs.dev) build tool, so
the command to build your code is `npm run build` and the files that should be
served (the output of the build) are in `dist/`.

To get the next 10 points, you need to follow the instructions at any of those
services and deploy your web page. They will give you a url that ends in
`pages.dev`, `netlify.app`, or `vercel.app` respectively (sometimes they give
you a random string, but you can customize it if you want). Replace
**http://domain.invalid** in `student.json` with your new web app URL, and
deploy your app. If you've correctly set up the deployment service, all you need
to do to deploy your app is `git push` your edits, and the service will receive
a notification from GitHub that your code changed, then it will pull the code,
build the website, and push the built website out to the Internet.

If you've done all of this without introducing any type/format/lint errors, `npm
run test` should all be passing and you are well on your way to 100% in the
class. Great job! ðŸŽ‰

### Submitting your work

After you are confident that you are passing all of the tests, you can submit it
via Gradescope. All the Gradescope autograder does is re-run the same tests
again; if your tests are passing both on your local machine and on GitHub, it
shouldn't fail on Gradescope. If you have issues with the autograder, please
contact us via the class discussion board ASAP.

<Deadlines />

## Points

Each test is worth five points, each check is worth three points, for a total of
23 points. Note that this implicitly tests your ability to download Node,
install packages, edit files, upload to github, etc.

This is almost certainly the easiest assignment, so I recommend you aim for full
points. Getting this done should take less than a half an hour, even if you've
never used JavaScript before.

## Alternate quickstart

As Netlify's policies don't allow for an Organization's Private Repository to be hosted, here is a way around getting your first assignment deployed.

1.  Goto: [https://github.com/swad-cs-uic/homework0/](https://github.com/swad-cs-uic/homework0/)
2.  Click Use this template to create your own **PRIVATE** repository. (You must create a Private Repository for academic integrity)
3.  Clone this / Set up your created Repository, on your local.
4.  Make changes to the code base as per the homework requirements.
5.  Commit and push your changes to your repo.
6.  Open Netlify and connect your GitHub repository and you're all set.

Submitting your assignment to Gradescope:

1.  While selecting the repository under Submission Method, choose the repository \[It's the one _that you just created, pushed changes to, and then connected with Netlify._\]
2.  You should see the autograder firing up and see the result.
